Things he did was establish, for me, it was
Wednesday morning meetings. Every other week, I
had an audience with him. Now, either of us could
call and cancel, and sometimes did, but not too
often. And for an hour, I had his complete ear. We'd
spend three or four minutes talking about what was
on his mind, and then the rest of the time was mine.
And the answer to the question is yes, very
definitely yes. Back to your own style, a while ago
I meant to ask and I think I interrupted myself. As
department head, how much did you feel bound, I'd
say it's in a faculty review, a promotion, a
tenure, or an appointment, how much did you feel
bound by the majority opinion of the department?
compared to your own evaluation? For the most
part, I felt the faculty's will ought to be served,
but I wasn't afraid if there was... I only recall
one time going against the faculty in a tenure
decision, and of course I sent both
recommendations forward, but Was yours negative
compared to theirs? No, mine was positive and
theirs was negative. Okay. In that particular
instance, it could have gone the other way. What I
made my faculty a promise with, one good example is
new faculty hires. A promise I made them was that I
would not hire someone that they didn't want, but I
would not allow them to hire someone that I didn't
want. And that worked pretty well in most things we
dealt with. I don't, if I erred, I erred on the side
of bringing the faculty in too much. I think they
got weary of that toward the end. And I probably
didn't use good judgment in some cases. During
your years as department head, now in looking
back, did the department miss any opportunities?
We missed a big one right at the end of my tenure. I
think, time will tell. We had an opportunity to
develop a biomechanics lab. We had biomechanics
as a specialty, but we didn't have a very good lab.
We had an excellent exercise physiology lab. We
had a very good motor learning lab. We had a chance
to develop biomechanics, and I thought we should
have done that. If we had done that, we'd be
studying in a very scientific way the most
efficient way of performing a sports skill, and
might even could have landed one of the Olympic
training centers on this campus. But the exercise
physiology people at that time saw that as a
threat. Because it was going to take some money to
do that. That equipment is not cheap. And they saw
that as money siphoning away from them. The motor
learning felt the same way. And that was a case
where the faculty carried the day. I didn't think
that was a decision that needed to be unilaterally
made. It was one that if enough people were against
it, it would fail. I think we missed the boat there.
I think we really should have done that. But time
will tell, because what we have done instead is our
exercise physiology program is twice as large now
as it was. We have the only two distinguished
professors in the College of Education are both in
physical education, the current department head
and Jack Wilmore, who was department head last
year. That program I think very quickly will be,
we're talking about top tens, I think very quickly
they will be named among the top ten in the country
and maybe in the top four or five. Now, in terms of
Vision 2020, that's the right track to take. In
terms of serving the people of Texas, I'm not so
sure. Your health was what caused you to need to
decide to step away from being department head, I
presume. Well, no, actually not. I had decided
that I was going to do that because I was reaching
the point where I felt like Well, I lost my leader.
Corrigan had stepped down as dean. And he had been
my, let's see, one, two, three, my fourth dean. And
as you know, you can only serve so many masters that
way. Because every one of them changes a little,
and that forces you to change your direction a
little. And you tend to lose some of your
consistency, I think. That had a lot to do with it.
The other was I was growing tired. I'd been there a
while, and I think they were a little tired of me
too. And I enjoyed teaching, and I wanted to get
back to that. I had already made the decision to
retire, not retire, but to resign from the
department of his job, and in fact had resigned
before I was diagnosed with heart disease. And so
what did you start doing, and what were your goals
then as a full-time faculty member? I... I
requested a study leave and was granted that. And
so I went down to Baylor College of Medicine I have a
good friend down that I had been working with all
these years and took some courses there and also at
the UT School of Public Health to try to recover my
discipline a little because I obviously had lost
my discipline by then. I came back and my goal was to
spend the first year getting my classes laid out so
that I felt comfortable then and then my second
year I was going to focus on establishing a
research agenda and I had full plans to to become a
working active member of the faculty again.
Because when I became a department head, I thought
I was near the cutting edge of my field. I wanted to
get back somewhere then. I made the first year all
right, but it was in that first year that my wife was
diagnosed with breast cancer and then I was
diagnosed with heart disease. I'm afraid I didn't
meet that latter goal because by then I was
thinking pretty seriously about it was time to
start thinking about retiring. But you're still
full-time right now? I'm still full-time right
now. And what are you working on? Well, this year,
for the first year I haven't taught. I've been
teaching a full load until this year. This year I
bought my teaching time out with a chair. And what
I'm attempting to do is get ready to turn loose the
camp because that still is, I think, an important
part of our department. I'm on the board of
trustees for the Reed Youth Charities. And Mrs.
Reed would like for me to continue to be the
overseer of the camp even after retirement. And I
may very well come back. In fact, the plan is to come
back 25 percent of the time and do that. But this
year what I've tried to do is locate some of our
campers. We don't have real good follow-up work on
where those youngsters are. Each one of them that
go to that camp are guaranteed a scholarship to
A&M. We haven't been moderately successful.
They're all at-risk kids, and getting them in the
university is real difficult. We've only had
seven or eight or nine all the time we worked. But
where are the rest of them? I'm convinced that
we've done some good with those youngsters, but
where are they now? So I've been trying to do some
follow-up with them. And then also establish some
relationship with school districts where they
will help us identify youngsters who are at risk
that we can give that same experience to. So I've
been doing most of that this year. I had enough
funds in the chair to do it once. I couldn't do that
more than once. Of your almost 30 years here, To
what administrators, deans, vice presidents, or
provosts, presidents, chancellors, I'm not
going to ask the negative, to which
administrators would you give the highest marks
for their leadership here at A&M? Well, I've
always already said that Jack Williams was my
hero, and I'll stick by that. I think he was
outstanding. But he, in all honesty, he didn't
have a lot of effect on me. other than
peripherally,
the president that, I knew Jarvis Miller very
well. His daughter and my daughter played in the
orchestra, the Rises Valley Orchestra, and I was
with him on a trip to see our girls play the week
before he was named president the next week, and I
didn't have a clue that was going to happen. So I
knew him well, but I have to say Frank Vandiver
probably was the next president that I was most
impacted by. He had a tumultuous administration,
but gosh, he was good to work with.
You recall the days when seniors didn't have to
take final tests. The faculty senate decided to
dig their heels in, and we were going to change
this. And we went to his office. to hear the words
spoken by him that it ain't gonna fly. And we were
able to sit there and work out and negotiate a
compromise. that when we hit upon it, it was almost
like he knew this is what should happen, but he was
waiting for us to say it and walked away from there
feeling real good about it. And in fact, we got it
done. He was a faculty member's department
president, I think. I think he never was
comfortable being a president. He was still a
faculty member. So from that point of view, those
were the two that I thought the most of. I really
only worked... a reasonable time with two deans,
Hubert when I was a faculty member and then later on
as department head. Lembacher, Phil Lembacher
was acting for a year and he was very, very helpful
because I was a brand new department head, didn't
know, come here from Sycam and he helped me an awful
lot. But then Corrigan would have to be my pick
there. I worked with Chris Borman as an acting dean
for a while. And then I only served one year under
Jane Stallings.
So at the dean's level, I thought that was, Cargan
would be my pick. I only worked for one department
head here, and that was, well, no, actually, Carl
Landis was the department head, but I worked with
Bob Armstrong, who's the current department
head, and Jack Wilmore, but it was after I had been
in that role, and they pretty well left me alone,
and I didn't, I didn't and I tried to stay out of
their way. So I have to say in retrospect that Carl
was really fun to work for and that's surprising me
that I can say that today because my first three or
four years I wouldn't have told you that at all. Are
there other people related to your A&M experience
if they could be brought into this room that you
would want to express appreciation to? Oh, gosh,
yes. Brian Cole was really helpful. Particularly
after I became department head, he was helpful.
Because he was then the assistant. He was then
assistant to the dean and became, before I left the
office, he became associate dean and took
Limbacher's position. He was really good to work
with. And Cargan was wise enough to turn a lot of
things over to him. That's in the college level.
I'll always appreciate Chris Borman, because he
took a thankless job and did it. I don't think we
were, as a university, was quite straight with
him, because he took the acting dean's job
thinking he had a chance to be dean, and really
didn't have a chance. In the upper
administration, Chuck McCandless was
outstanding. Of course, he understood us. I loved
that guy like a brother almost, and he was neat.
I've forgotten who was provost that went to Iowa
State. It may have been your friend that called you
about the basketball club. Oh, no, no. Former dean
of geosciences. Right, that's right. I really
liked him an awful lot. You were gone by the time he
came aboard, weren't you? He did a very nice job.
Let's see, some goofy moments in your A&M
experience? I took the liberty of trying to think
of a few of those. One was, remember Howard Vestal?
Sure. Howard Vestal erected a stop sign in the
middle of a block right across from Rudder Tower.
This was after you, I think you may have been in
Missouri at that time, but he came out of his office
one day and almost got hit by a car, came back the
next day and ruled that they were going to put a stop
sign up. And he had a stop sign right in the middle of
that intersection where he crossed. And cars
would . And 30 minutes after he retired, that stop
sign came down. That's a good one. I thought that
was outstanding.
Pranks that anybody ever played on the department
head while you were the department head? I don't
know whether it was a prank or not, but God played a
prank on us. My first year as department head, the
snow melted on Mount Aggie.
I think you were still here then. Well, I know what
Mount Aggie was. Yeah, okay. We had AstroTurf on
Mount Aggie, and Carl Landis retired, but one of
the last things he did was buy something called SNO
something. I forgot what it was. Snow Flow or
something like that. It was a black surface. It had
prongs sticking up on it, and the kids really liked
it. The teachers liked it because it really would
give you the feel of edging in snow. The only
problem is when the weather got the slightest bit
cool that fall, that brittle, and they'd pop off
just like machines. And so I got a phone call. Chip,
what's Chip's name, works down at the TV station,
one of the radio stations in town, Chip Howard.
Chip Howard wanted to interview me. And, of
course, I'd only been on the job just a few weeks,
and I thought, Oh, Lord, I am going to embarrass the
whole university. And what he wanted to envy me
about was the snow that melted on Mount Aggie. And I
went to great detail to explain to him that we were
careful not to waste the university's money. I
surely thought he was on a witch hunt when he came.
Probably the worst thing that happened to me It
happened in 1986. We had a teacher, she's still on
our faculty, a very fine teacher. And she taught
outdoor, what we called outdoor education. And in
that program was a weekend camping trip where they
would go out to the wilderness someplace. And in
this case, they went to Enchanted Rock out near
Kerrville and would rock climb at the backside of
that rock. And she did some really neat things with
those youngsters. That was the safest thing they
did was rock climbing, in fact. But she did some
really neat things with those kids and we have a
ropes course that she developed and a lot of
business executives go through that building
team and that kind of thing. But she had gone by
automobile and she had six people in a car and on the
way back, Out there where the east loop joins 21,
she was ahead of this particular, I don't know if
there's a car ahead of them or not, but she was ahead
of one car and she exited on to the sixth loop and she
said she looked in the rearview mirror and saw the
other car missed the turn and remarked did they
miss the turn. What they did was they went down
another few blocks and realized they'd missed the
turn, pulled over, and then made a U-turn right in
front of a tractor truck, and it killed five of
those kids, and one of them was Robert Walker's
son, Richard. I'm telling you, I'm still fragile
about that. It's the worst thing that can happen to
anyone. To a lesser degree, I understood what
President Bowen was going through with the
bonfire thing. It just eats your guts right out.
And I don't think I ever recovered from that
totally. It's something I remember, but I don't
want to remember it. Yes. And Bob Walker and his
wife Joanne were rocks. I mean, just strong,
strong faith. That's right. Absolutely.
All right, now I'm just about out of questions.
What have we left out that we should have? Well, I
think maybe you gave me a chance to say about
everything I noticed.
You were talking about Mac Prescott a while ago. I
was thinking about some things. Everybody who
lives in the administration, I think, has some
one-liners that are really good. You were always
good at this. Your sense of humor was, I think, kept
you apart. Mac Prescott was famous for saying,
give me patience and give it to me now. And I'm
humble and proud of it. And I guess I picked up some
little things like that from nearly everybody who
sat in that office. I remember
Oh, who was the president that preceded Bowen? I'm
blocking his name. Bill Mobley? Bill Mobley. Bill
Mobley retired and John Coles retired three days
before him and three days after him. And at John
Coles' retirement reception, Bill Mobley said, I
promised myself that I would retire three days
before John Coles. I thought that was good. I
believe we've, okay, let me then appoint you as a
consultant. Let's make believe that you have now
been recruited to advise the department and the
college about what they're, what they should be
trying to do next. What advice would you give to the
department in the College of Education as they are
looking toward the future?
I think from the college's point of view, they're
in a real difficult situation. Somewhere along
the way, we decided that colleges of education
were the cause of poor teaching that goes on in
public schools and poor education that goes on
there. And consequently, colleges of education
are just hanging on by their fingertips.
And as a result of that, they are doing some things
that they might not ought to be doing.
I wouldn't expect anybody to take this advice, but
I think it's what colleges ought to do, is they
shouldn't sell their souls in order to survive. If
they can't survive doing what they are designed to
do, then fold. Just go away. Now, that's contrary
to what human nature is. But I think if we aren't
careful, we'll try to do some things we shouldn't
be doing, and we wind up not doing those well and
getting in trouble. If I were going to advise the
department, a lot of it goes back to what you and I
have already talked about.
I really think that we are much, much
overemphasizing the exercise physiology
component.
They don't have a constituency. They're very good
at what they're doing. They're conducting very
good research. And as I said, we have the only two
distinguished professors in the entire college.
And they are good. I think their research would
stand up with anybody's. But who are they doing it
for? They can't, they don't have a constituency.
They're doing it for the sake of reporting it in
journals of which other exercise physiologists
will read and do research and report to other
exercise physiologists. And that pyramid's
going to topple one of these days. We're, more and
more we're charging students who are using the
university We're putting more and more of the
burden of paying for the university on them, less
and less on the state. And the more we do that, the
more critical the parents who are paying for the
education are going to be. And one day they're
going to look and say, what are we getting for our
money? And I'm of the opinion right now that it's
the worst investment they make, based on what, as
an insider in the university, I think it's one of
the worst investments they make. And that breaks
my heart to say that. I wish I didn't believe that. I
wish it weren't true. And hopefully it isn't true,
but it sure feels that way. So I'd say to our
department, we need to determine who our
constituencies are and try to address their needs
better than what we're doing right now. All right.
Let's make believe someone walks up and gives you a
check for a million dollars with one condition.
You must pass it on to Texas A&M, but you've got to
decide the use of that money. If you could make a
truly meaningful gift to this institution, for
what purpose would you give that?
There's just a bunch of them, obviously.
You're asking me now to be magnanimous, and I don't
know if I could be.
Well,
I guess what I think, I don't know if this would be
the answer I'd give or not, but it addresses a need
that's consistent with what I just said. The cost
of going to school is greater now than it's ever
been, and I fear that a lot of people are being cut
out now for reasons that they never were cut out
before. When I came to school, money was not going
to keep me from going to college. My ability and
willingness to study might, but I could probably
make it. I could sell eggs and make it. But that's
not true anymore. So I guess I would encourage that
person to put them into scholarships that
students could. What kind of students would you
want to receive these scholarships? Well, I don't
think I would, again, this is consistent with what
my beliefs is, I wouldn't want them to become the
elite student. I wouldn't want them to go to the
elite student. To the elite? Yeah. You mean elite
in? Elite in terms of having to be the very top best
students you can get your hands on. I think when all
your scholarships are restricted to just that
level of student, Again, we're leaving a lot of
people out. Would this be on the basis of need? Yes,
yes. What about their major? Well, I don't know if I
would want to... Obviously, I'd be biased. I'd
want... us to get the whole million dollars. But I
don't think it should. I think the need is going to
be across the board.
You could make the case that maybe some fields are
attracting people who can pay their way. But I
think there are people who can go into those fields
who can't pay their way.
There's no question that we've got a dichotomy
going on in our society. The rich are getting
richer, and the poor are getting poorer. And I
don't think it's all because of the rich being so
selfish and jealous. I think some of it is the way
we're running our universities. We've become so
elite until all of us want to teach the very best,
and we want to shoot the rest. And was it Jefferson
who said, you could tell me, to expect a country to
be uneducated and free is to expect what never was
and never will be? We're leaving a lot of people
out. And A&M is contributing to that, because
every time we pass a $50 a semester fee, someone
else is not coming to school because of it. Last
question. What feelings do you carry in your heart
for this institution now? Oh, I love it. I love it.
I've always fallen in love with every institution
I've ever worked in. I don't know whether my dad
taught me this or where I got it, but I've never
worked at a place I didn't love. It doesn't take me
very long to fall in love, but A&M is a special
place. I tell my kids when I talk regularly that
there's two or three things I've learned about
them. One is they are unique. To say that there's a
spirit of Aggieland is to belie the spirit of other
universities. Every university has a spirit. But
this is a very distinct spirit. And what I say to
them is, you don't know how good you are. I have
found that they know how to play. And they can play
as good as any of them. But they know when to stop
playing and start working. And they do it better
than any group I've ever been associated with. For
a non-aggie, I bleed maroon and white pretty
severely. It's
a great place.